# Project structure and files

## The `pyproject.toml`

Python project metadata is defined in a
[`pyproject.toml`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/) file. fyn
requires this file to identify the root directory of a project.

!!! tip

    `fyn init` can be used to create a new project. See [Creating projects](./init.md) for
    details.

A minimal project definition includes a name and version:

```toml title="pyproject.toml"
[project]
name = "example"
version = "0.1.0"
```

Additional project metadata and configuration includes:

- [Python version requirement](./config.md#python-version-requirement)
- [Dependencies](./dependencies.md)
- [Build system](./config.md#build-systems)
- [Entry points (commands)](./config.md#entry-points)

## The project environment

When working on a project with fyn, fyn will create a virtual environment as needed. While some fyn
commands will create a temporary environment (e.g., `fyn run --isolated`), fyn also manages a
persistent environment with the project and its dependencies in a `.venv` directory next to the
`pyproject.toml`. It is stored inside the project to make it easy for editors to find — they need
the environment to give code completions and type hints. It is not recommended to include the
`.venv` directory in version control; it is automatically excluded from `git` with an internal
`.gitignore` file.

To run a command in the project environment, use `fyn run`. Alternatively the project environment
can be activated as normal for a virtual environment.

When `fyn run` is invoked, it will create the project environment if it does not exist yet or ensure
it is up-to-date if it exists. The project environment can also be explicitly created with
`fyn sync`. See the [locking and syncing](./sync.md) documentation for details.

It is _not_ recommended to modify the project environment manually, e.g., with `fyn pip install`.
For project dependencies, use `fyn add` to add a package to the environment. For one-off
requirements, use [`fynx`](../../guides/tools.md) or
[`fyn run --with`](./run.md#requesting-additional-dependencies).

!!! tip

    If you don't want fyn to manage the project environment, set [`managed = false`](../../reference/settings.md#managed)
    to disable automatic locking and syncing of the project. For example:

    ```toml title="pyproject.toml"
    [tool.fyn]
    managed = false
    ```

## The lockfile

fyn creates a `fyn.lock` file next to the `pyproject.toml`.

`fyn.lock` is a _universal_ or _cross-platform_ lockfile that captures the packages that would be
installed across all possible Python markers such as operating system, architecture, and Python
version.

Unlike the `pyproject.toml`, which is used to specify the broad requirements of your project, the
lockfile contains the exact resolved versions that are installed in the project environment. This
file should be checked into version control, allowing for consistent and reproducible installations
across machines.

A lockfile ensures that developers working on the project are using a consistent set of package
versions. Additionally, it ensures when deploying the project as an application that the exact set
of used package versions is known.

The lockfile is [automatically created and updated](./sync.md#automatic-lock-and-sync) during fyn
invocations that use the project environment, i.e., `fyn sync` and `fyn run`. The lockfile may also
be explicitly updated using `fyn lock`.

`fyn.lock` is a human-readable TOML file but is managed by fyn and should not be edited manually.
The `fyn.lock` format is specific to fyn and not usable by other tools.

### Relationship to `pylock.toml`

In [PEP 751](https://peps.python.org/pep-0751/), Python standardized a new resolution file format,
`pylock.toml`.

`pylock.toml` is a resolution output format intended to replace `requirements.txt` (e.g., in the
context of `fyn pip compile`, whereby a "locked" `requirements.txt` file is generated from a set of
input requirements). `pylock.toml` is standardized and tool-agnostic, such that in the future,
`pylock.toml` files generated by fyn could be installed by other tools, and vice versa.

Some of fyn's functionality cannot be expressed in the `pylock.toml` format; as such, fyn will
continue to use the `fyn.lock` format within the project interface.

However, fyn supports `pylock.toml` as an export target and in the `fyn pip` CLI. For example:

- To export a `fyn.lock` to the `pylock.toml` format, run: `fyn export -o pylock.toml`
- To generate a `pylock.toml` file from a set of requirements, run:
  `fyn pip compile requirements.in -o pylock.toml`
- To install from a `pylock.toml` file, run: `fyn pip sync pylock.toml` or
  `fyn pip install -r pylock.toml`
